Hello everyone
and welcome to errors and exception handling.
This will be just a general overview
of some of the keywords and concepts
on exception handling in Python
and how to deal with errors in your code.
Let's take a quick look at an example error.
Here I have a cell where I said, print single quote Hello
and I forgot to put a single quote at the end of that.
If I try to run that cell,
I get this syntax error and it says,
'EOL while scanning the string literal'.
That stands for End Of Line error
while scanning the string literal.
This sort of syntax error is known as an exception
and it's specific enough for me to see
that I had an error there.
What is an exception?
It's a specific description of types of errors.
Even if a statement or expression is syntactically correct,
it may cause an error when you attempt to execute it.
A lot of these errors that are detected during execution
are called exceptions so if we go back,
the syntax error is a type of exception.
What's interesting to note here
is that the errors detected during execution
that are called exceptions,
they're not unconditionally fatal.
What that phrase means is that
it won't have to break your entire code.
You can have one of those exceptions occur
and with the right syntax, with try and except,
which we'll learn about in just a second,
you can actually have the rest of your code run.
This is where the try and except keywords come into play.
The basic terminology and syntax used to handle errors
in Python is known as this try and the except statements.
The code which can cause an exception to occur
can be put in a 'try' block and then the handling
of that exception can be implemented
into the 'except' block of code.
As far as syntax, it looks a little something like this.
You have a 'try' statement and then you have a block of code
within that 'try' statement block
and you do your operations here
that you may suspect will throw up some sort of exception.
Just like earlier, we could've had that syntax error.
Let's say I said 'try' and I would've put,
print single quote Hello with no end there
and then I have an 'except' statement.
This is 'except', and you can actually specify
the specific exception you're looking out for,
so in the last case it would've been
syntax error, that phrase.
You can say, Okay if a syntax error shows up
then execute a certain block of code.
You can also check for multiple exceptions,
maybe some other sort of error.
There's a whole list and there's a link
in the Jupiter notebook, to all the official exceptions
in Python but granted, you don't actually need to know
the name of the exception, you can just say
except, colon, and then in the case of any exception,
it'll run this block of code.
We'll go over this in more detail
when we go to the live coding.
After all your 'except' statements,
what you can have is an 'else'.
If there is no exception,
then execute what's in the 'else' block.
The 'finally' keyword.
The 'finally' keyword allows us to place code
that will always be run even if there are exceptions.
The 'finally' block of code, like I said,
will be run regardless of if
there was an exception in the 'try' code block.
So what that looks like, is I can say, try,
some code block here, and due to any exception,
you may skip this code such as that 'print' statement.
There's an error here, it doesn't matter,
finally I want you to execute the code block
in the 'finally' section of your code.
Now you can combine all three keywords,
'try', 'except', 'finally' to make your code
more robust to errors.
You can have a 'try' block, where you try to run some
code where you think there may be an error,
'except' to check for certain exceptions
and then 'finally' so even if there is an exception,
I want you to run this code block, the 'finally' code block.
I know that was quite a bit,
but what we're gonna do now is go over
all those topics through some live coding sessions.
Thanks and I will see you there.